Hi, everyone. I'm Gagandeep Singh, and I'm joined by my colleague, Xu Fei. We are solutions
engineers at RStudio, soon to be called Posit. And we are here to answer a question that
we get asked a lot, which is, can you use Python with RStudio Team? And the answer is,
of course, yes, you can. Very recently, I had to answer this question, so I'm going
to start by sharing a story with you. I'm an Indian national. In order to be here in
the U.S. to attend this conference, I need to get a visa. And as part of the immigration
process, I have to get an interview with an officer, where they ask you questions like,
where are you going? What will you be doing? So I told them that I'm going to this conference,
I'm giving a talk about using Python with RStudio. The officer said, oh, I know Python,
but I didn't know you could use it with RStudio. Well, I told him that's exactly what my talk
is about. Unfortunately, officer Johnson could not be here with us today. But if you're
in the audience, we are assuming that you're a multilingual data scientist who has access
to RStudio products and wants to use Python with them. Or you are an R user who works
with a lot of Python colleagues, and you may or may not have access to our products, but
you're looking for ways to collaborate with them.
So it is one thing to say that you can use Python in RStudio products. We're here to
show you how it works with a use case. We're in the D.C. area right now, and there is an
active bike share program outside called Capital Bike Share. We went out and took the picture
yesterday, and this is the station right outside of the hotel. As you can see, there are bikes
docked into the bike station. When you go to the company's website, you will see a map
that shows you all the bike stations. When you click on one of the stations, it will
show you how many bikes are available right now from a live data feed.
Now, what it doesn't tell you is how many bikes are going to be available in the future.
As we know, the bike availability varies a lot by the time of day, the location, and
we, if we want to have a smooth trip experience, we want to be able to predict how many bikes
are going to be available in the future. So because there's a live data feed, we can
actually grab the data, store it somewhere, and make a predictive model so that we can
actually know how many bikes are going to be available in the future. So that's what
we want to do. If you were here at the very conference back
in 2020, you probably have seen a talk that uses the similar data set, does everything
in R packages. It's actually from our colleague Alex. So this project has been successfully
running for over two years. So a lot of data has been processed and stored as interoperable
data assets that we'll get back to in a second. And there's a lot of data being stored and
processed. When I joined the company last year from more
of a Python data science background, Gagan and I started talking. So since we have all
these data, can we do something different? Can we do something entirely in Python and
using our pro products? And we wanted to do this for two reasons. Number one, well, just
because we can, why not? Well, that's not really a good reason. The second reason is
actually we thought this could be a very common scenario where in our pro product customers,
the teams that work in one language may want to collaborate with another team in a different
language using interoperable data assets that's completely deployed in the pro product ecosystem.
So we are also thinking that the conference is going to be in D.C., so we actually get
to go to D.C. and ride those bikes. And here we are.
So let's recap the workflow for the bike prediction use case. As in with any other project, it
starts with the data source, which in this case is the capital bike share API, and the
data is refreshed every day. Then the objective is to import this data, transform it, and
save it either in a database or an interoperable data asset like bins, so based on the frequency
of the update. Then we have to consume this data, build a prediction model to show the
number of bikes for each bike station. Then we have to move this model to a deployable
location where the output, the predictions of the number of bikes can be shared with
other applications. And speaking of other applications, we have to build a way to share
the predictions with our users. As in with the previous talk, this work is already available
and running successfully all in R. So Shufay and I, when we were looking at this use case,
we realized that we have access to this data already in the form of the database and the
bins that the R ETL process is updating. So we decided to, in order to address the needs
of a team which uses a similar workflow, where part of the workflow is in one language and
part of the workflow is in another language, we decided that we'll build the model, build
the dashboards in Python, all within our RStudio products.
So let's take a look at the application itself. So this is developed in Shiny for Python,
as you heard yesterday, deployed on RStudio Connect, which we'll get into in a second.
You see a map of the DC area, and there are circles with numbers in them. These represent
this cluster of bike stations. If you click into it, it zooms in, and eventually we'll
see blue circles that represent the stations themselves. The bigger the circle, the more
bikes that are available, and if you click on one of the circles, it's going to give
you the predictive graph of the number of bikes available in the next 24 hours.
So you heard of RStudio team and RStudio professional products, and how does ‑‑ what are they?
And why do we need them? And how does Python fit in here? RStudio team is actually an umbrella
term for three professional products, namely Workbench, Connect, and Package Manager.
As Python data scientists, we need a place to start writing our project in code, and
we need an environment to code. And so Workbench offers a centralized server‑based environment
that allows you to code in your favorite data science IDEs, so Jupyter and VS Code.
As your project matures, you may want to start sharing your content and deploy it somewhere,
and that's where your RStudio Connect comes in handy. It's designed exactly for that,
and allows you to deploy a very wide variety of data science assets, especially the interoperable
ones, such as pins, APIs, and reports like Quartel and Jupyter notebooks, and interactive
dashboards like Plotly Dash, Streamlit, and, of course, our favorite and the latest, Shiny
for Python. And if you want to install packages into a
centralized location, and that's not directly from PyPI, you can use Package Manager for
that. So what are we going to show you in the next
few minutes is that we're going to show you a workflow from developing the model using
existing interoperable data objects in the Workbench, and we'll deploy that to Connect,
and I'll come back and visit the application itself, we'll make a change, and we'll update
it live to the Connect deployment.
So let's see the demo. As Shufei mentioned, we're going to start with, like, we already
have access to the data, so we're going to start with the model building process. So
in order for me to start working, I need access to the IDE, so I go to our demo Workbench,
and as Shufei said, it supports multiple IDEs. A controversial opinion, I like to start my
work in notebooks, especially when I'm doing model building and data exploration, so I'm
going to choose the IDE JupyterLab here, and I'm going to launch a JupyterLab session.
I've already launched it here, and this is the notebook I'm using to train the model
and deploy it, and as you can see, I might have to zoom in a bit.
So I'm beginning with all the basics, starting with importing all the packages that I need
in my work, setting up my environment, providing API keys and database passwords. I've also
built some functions for repeatable code that I'm going to use later, and this is where
I start making a connection to the database, which has all the data about the bike stored.
So this database is being updated by the RETL process, so I don't need to do the data cleaning
and exploration. I can directly import this data as a data frame in my Python environment,
and I can create a testing and training data set and start building my model.
So for this work, we chose the random forest model, but another iteration of this work
can be building different kinds of models and comparing their performances. But let's
take two random forests for this one, and now I've built the model, I need to test it,
so I create my testing set, and I compare the results with the actual data.
What I have done here so far is what we do every day as data scientists, right? And maybe
you all can do it better than I did. But the next challenge for me is to move this model
out of my notebook into a place where other applications can consume the predictions it's
making. And this is where I'm going to use a combination of Vetiver and RStudio Connect.
So as Julia introduced Vetiver in her keynote yesterday, and also Isabel gave a great talk
about using Vetiver in MLOps operations, I'm going to skip explaining Vetiver, but I'm
going to show you how I use it in my work. So in order to start working, I will convert
the random forest model that I just built into a Vetiver model so that Vetiver can
interact with it. And once I've converted that, I will pin this Vetiver model onto an
RSConnect board. Yes, this is the same pins package that is available in R, but now it's
also available in Python, and it's used in Vetiver for model versioning. And once I've
pinned the model onto RStudio Connect, I will deploy it as a fast API endpoint onto Connect
itself. And I'm using the inbuilt function from Vetiver called deploy RSConnect. So
what this function is doing is I'm passing the name of the pin directly to the function,
and it's converting this function into a fast, converting this model into a fast API and
directly deploying it on my RStudio Connect instance. So you can see, right, like from
a few lines of code, under 10 lines of code, I was able to move this model from my notebook
into Connect using Vetiver. So I've done the deployment to save us time here. Let's
see what the deployment looks like. So this is my deployed model as a fast API onto RStudio
Connect. So I get access to these docs that the fast API provides. I can see the API URL.
I can see what kind of features it's taking. I can make a sample prediction. I can play
with it here. As this API is running on RStudio Connect, I get access to all these features,
which is what Connect provides. So I can decide who I want to share this API with.
I can change the runtime credentials for this API. I can manage it here.
What I've done so far is run the model once on the current state of the database, but
the R process is updating this database every day because the number of bikes are changing
every day. So that data is also getting refreshed. So my next task is to update my model with
the latest data so that it's always available with the right data, the current data.
So for this work, I'm also again using RStudio Connect. RStudio Connect provides you the
ability to deploy a Jupyter notebook and schedule it. So I'm going to deploy this Jupyter notebook
using the Git-based deployment in RStudio Connect. This is one of the many types of
deployment available. I'm going to use Git-based to make sure that my code on my Git repo is
consistent with what is available on RStudio Connect.
And to save us time, this is a short talk. I've already deployed this notebook on RStudio
Connect, and this is what it looks like, the same notebook that I had in my IDE. And I'm
going to use the schedule feature of RStudio Connect, create a schedule to run this notebook
every time the data is updated.
All right. So, so far we have seen the process of developing the model in Workbench and deploy
to Connect and let it run as a notebook on a regular basis. For this part, I'm going
to show you the app itself, and we're going to make a change in the app and we'll live
deploy to our server, Connect server, and we'll see how it works.
So right now, just take a look back at the app again. This time I wanted you to pay attention
to the color of these circles. They look kind of blueish. Just keep that in mind. It's going
to be relevant in a second.
I'm going to show you something here. So we made this application in Shiny for Python.
It's very, very exciting to use this package, and I learned a lot from this. And, in fact,
I actually find the documentation and this online examples, it's kind of magical WASM
tutorials, really helpful, and if you want to learn more about it, Winston has a talk
coming up right after our talk, so definitely stay for that.
What I wanted to highlight here in the code is the interoperability that really saved
us a lot of time. As Gagan mentioned, we can actually use pins, the pins package in R,
in Python, so this is the Python pins, and I'm reading a pin that's generated by my colleagues
Sam and Alex. This pin was generated from a portal document that's running on the schedule,
so basically it takes the bike station information, processes it, and it stores it in the pin
and it updates it every day. So I don't have to do anything, I just have to read it into
a data frame and use the data frame in my application, so it's really handy for me.
And at the same time, also use the vetivert endpoint to use the Gagan's API to predict
the number of bikes.
So here, the next, I'm going to show you the update. Now, I mentioned the color, right?
I don't really like dark blue color, it looks a little depressing to me. Gagan, do you have
any suggestions?
Yeah, let's make it orange, one of our new colors.
Okay, so let's change it to orange. All right. Change made. And so what I will do in this
case, we're going to deploy to the connect server, and I'm going to run it right now,
and we'll explain in a second what it means. So you probably cannot see everything, so
I'm just going to explain in general concepts. First, when you deploy to connect, as connect
supports a very large list of contents that you can host and you can deploy, the content
we chose is shiny because we support it, but if you want to use Streamlit or Plotly Dash,
these interactive contents, dashboards, totally support it as well.
On the other hand, the connect server, you need to specify where it is, so I'm going
to just go to the app, refresh a little bit, and you also have to pay attention to the
virtual environment because in Python it's very important, you want to isolate your environment
so that you have sufficient package isolation, and so what connect does at this point is
when you send the command, it uses the RSConnect package. This RSConnect Python package allows
you to programmatically deploy the content to connect using a command line, and it wraps
your content into a bundle first and uploads the bundle that includes the application itself,
the requirements.txt, so that connect first will look for the compatible Python version
on the server itself and will use the compatible version of Python to run the app and uses
the requirements.txt to rebuild the environment, so each deployment is sandboxed, it's robust
against future deployments, it does not impact previous deployments, it guarantees to run
all the time, so that is really handy for us, and at the end you can see that there's
success with the little green links here, and let's go back to the app again, let's
zoom in a little bit more, see the orange circles, right, and if you click on one of
them, and you're going to see the predictions, so all right, we made a change, and it's live
on connect again. So, let's take a look back at what we just did. We started off with our
base ETL jobs that's been running and it's been processing on the connect, and we started
building Python models using vetiver, pins, all the good things in Workbench, and we deployed
to connect so that it keeps running, and we also used the content that's deployed to connect
on the API in our Shiny for Python dashboard to serve our purpose to actually inform us
with future deployments, future predictions of the number of bikes. Now, what does it
mean to you? If you're already working Python and you have access to the RStudio team professional
products, well, you can just start using your favorite Python tools today. There's really
no need to wait. And if you work with Python colleagues, we just showed you a very simple
example, but I hope that it can serve as a little starting point for you to collaborate
and extend the capabilities across teams between Python and R teams so that all within the RStudio
team what we can offer, and we definitely hope you can take it to the next level than
what we did.
So what's next for you after this talk? We introduced a lot about our pro products today,
so Shufay and I and most of our customer-facing team is at the lounge right outside the room,
so come see us, have a chat. All the assets that we built and all the code behind it,
we have made it public, and if you have access to our pro products and want to start using
Python, there's documentation on enabling Jupyter and VS Code sessions in there, and
as Shufay was saying, you can deploy multiple different contents on connect, so the deployment
guide is also available. We also use some really exciting Python packages that we introduced
as part of the conference, so there's great documentation available for that. And that's
our talk. Thank you so much.